All Member Functions

Here’s the list of all member functions of std::map:


insert()	

Insert elements with a particular key in the map container.

count()	

Returns the number of elements matching specific key


equal_range()	

Returns an iterator of pairs. The pair refers to the bounds of a range that includes all the elements in the container which have a key equivalent to k.


erase()	

Used to erase elements from the map.


begin()

Returns an iterator pointing to the first element of the map.


end()

Returns an iterator pointing to the first element of the map.


rend()	
Returns a reverse iterator pointing to the element preceding the first element of the map


rbegin()	
Returns a reverse iterator pointing to the last element of the map.


find()

Returns an iterator to the element with key-value in the map if found, else returns the iterator to end.


crbegin()	

crbegin() returns a constant reverse iterator referring to the last element in the map container.


crend() 

crend() returns a constant reverse iterator pointing to the theoretical element before the first element in the map.


cbegin()	

 cbegin() returns a constant iterator referring to the first element in the map container.


cend()

cend() returns a constant iterator pointing to the element that is beyond the last element.


emplace()	

Inserts the key with value in the map container.


max_size() 	

Returns the maximum number of elements a map can hold.


upper_bound()	

Find the first element in the map that is just greater than the given key.


lower_bound()	

Find the first element in the map that is equal to or greater than the given key.


emplace_hint()	

Inserts the key and its element in the map container with a given hint.


value_comp() 	

Returns the object that determines how the elements in the map are ordered (‘<‘ by default).


key_comp() 	

Returns the object that determines how the elements in the map are ordered (‘<‘ by default).


size()	

Returns the number of elements in the map.


empty()	

Returns whether the map is empty.


clear() 	

Removes all the elements from the map.


at()	

at() function is used to the element associated with the key k.


swap()

swap() function is used to exchange the contents of two maps but the maps must be of the same type, although sizes may differ.
