References vs Pointers

Both references and pointers can be used to change the local variables of one function inside another function. Despite the similarity, there are the following differences between references and pointers which are listed in the below table:

Highlighting the key differences between References and Pointers in C++:


Definition	

A reference is an alias for an existing variable.	

A pointer is a variable that stores the memory address of another variable.


Initialization	

Must be initialized when declared and cannot be reassigned.	

Can be initialized later and can be reassigned to point to different objects.


Nullability	

Cannot be null; must always refer to an object.	

Can be null, pointing to no object (e.g., nullptr).


Syntax	

Uses & for declaration and accessing.	

Uses * for declaration and dereferencing, & for address-of.


Dereferencing	

No dereferencing required, can be used directly like a normal variable.	

Must be dereferenced using * to access the value it points to.


Void Type

A reference can never be void.

A pointer can be declared as void

Nesting

Reference variable has only one/single level of indirection.  

A pointer variable has n-levels/multiple levels of indirection i.e. single-pointer, double-pointer, triple-pointer

Pointer Arithmetic	

Cannot perform arithmetic operations (e.g., increment or decrement).

Can perform arithmetic operations (e.g., increment or decrement).


Use Case	

Primarily used for simpler, more readable references to variables.	

Used for more complex memory management, dynamic memory allocation, and handling arrays.


Example	

int& ref = x;	

int* ptr = &x;




Limitations of References

Once a reference is created, it cannot be later made to reference another object; it cannot be reset. This is often done with pointers. 

References cannot be NULL. Pointers are often made NULL to indicate that they are not pointing to any valid thing. 

A reference must be initialized when declared. There is no such restriction with pointers.


Due to the above limitations, references in C++ cannot be used for implementing data structures like Linked List, Tree, etc. In Java, references don’t have the above restrictions and can be used to implement all data structures. References being more powerful in Java is the main reason Java doesn’t need pointers.


Advantages of using References

Safer: Since references must be initialized, wild references like wild pointers are unlikely to exist. It is still possible to have references that don’t refer to a valid location

Easier to use: References don’t need a dereferencing operator to access the value. They can be used like normal variables. The ‘&’ operator is needed only at the time of declaration. Also, members of an object reference can be accessed with the dot operator (‘.’), unlike pointers where the arrow operator (->) is needed to access members.






